AC8 INPUTMAPPER: USER SETUP

This method translates a physical stick, throttle and optional additional
controllers into AC8's existing two X56 input roles. Configuration uses action names and physical button numbers.
UE4SS, mapper.lua and F5/F6 are not used. Restart AC8 after changing the INI.

Status: the supplied VIRPIL pair has worked in menus and flight. Its successful
capture validates the 0.1 translated states. The 0.2 additional-device path
has passed local tests but still needs live hardware validation.
This is the current in-process DLL method, not the proposed external HID driver.
Use it only for offline single-player with anti-cheat client protection disabled.
The method has not been approved for EAC-protected play.

1. SET UP OFFLINE LAUNCHING

The offline procedure below comes from the separate AC8HOTAS mod author's
published AC8 HOTAS Support installation page:
https://www.nexusmods.com/acecombat8wingsoftheve/mods/8
It is a community-documented offline setup, not an assurance from EAC/Bandai.

If your existing offline launch setup works, retain it. Otherwise, with AC8
closed, use Steam's Manage > Browse local files to open the installation root.
In its EasyAntiCheat folder, duplicate Settings.json as AC8InputMapper_Offline.json.
Leave Settings.json intact. In the duplicate, add this top-level JSON entry:

    "allow_null_client": "true"

Separate it from the preceding entry with a comma. If that key already exists,
change its value instead of duplicating it. Save with the .json extension.

Open AC8's Steam Properties > General > Launch Options. Save any previous
options, then enter this single line (including the quotes):

cmd /d /c "set EOS_USE_ANTICHEATCLIENTNULL=1&& %command% -anticheat_settings=AC8InputMapper_Offline.json"

Launch through Steam using this setup for offline campaign/free flight only.
This requests the null anti-cheat client; it does not uninstall the EAC service.
An EAC bootstrapper/window may still appear. If offline launching fails, stop
and inspect the JSON/path/launch settings; do not fall back to protected launching
with our DLL present. The controller log alone cannot certify EAC's runtime state.

2. LOCATE THE GAME'S DLL FOLDER AND BACK UP EXISTING FILES

From the installation root, open Game\Binaries\Win64.
Use Steam to locate your installation; drive letters vary.

Close the game before making changes. If dinput8.dll is already there, identify
what installed it and save a backup outside the game folder. Our DLL cannot
share that filename with another DirectInput proxy/mod loader.

Disable the old UE4SS-based AC8HOTAS/AC8AnalogYaw setup. In our research setup,
renaming its dwmapi.dll loader to dwmapi.dll.disable prevented it from loading.
Disabling one Lua mod alone does not unload UE4SS. Check any other loader you use.

3. OBTAIN YOUR CONTROLLERS' INSTANCE GUIDS

Connect the stick, throttle and any additional devices you want to use. With AC8 closed, open this
release package's tools folder and double-click List-Controllers.cmd.
Keep List-Controllers.exe in the same folder as that command file.

The tool displays connected controller names, InstanceGUID, ProductGUID,
button counts and available axes. It also writes controllers.txt beside itself.
It needs neither administrator privileges nor UE4SS. It does not launch AC8,
acquire controllers, read live input, or change game files. It loads Windows'
system DirectInput DLL rather than the compatibility proxy.

Find your stick by name and copy its entire InstanceGUID, including braces.
Repeat for the throttle. Use InstanceGUID, NOT ProductGUID, a VID/PID pair,
a Device Manager hardware ID, or a Steam controller identifier.

If two devices have indistinguishable names, disconnect one, rerun the tool,
identify the remaining device, then reconnect both and run it again. Use the
final connected inventory. Windows can change instance identity after device
reinstallation or USB rearrangement; rerun inventory if an assignment stops.

joy.cpl is useful for physical button identification, but it does not give you
the required DirectInput instance GUID. Run joy.cpl with Win+R to open Windows'
controller test panel. Our INI is one-based: its first button is Button1.
Some other tools show zero-based indices; index 0 corresponds to Button1.
For high-numbered buttons not displayed by joy.cpl, use your controller software
or a suitable DirectInput viewer and check its numbering convention.

4. COPY THE TWO RUNTIME FILES

Copy this release's dinput8.dll and AC8InputMapper.ini into Game\Binaries\Win64.
The INI starts disabled and unbound. Enter your own GUIDs and assignments before
enabling it. When updating, preserve your existing assignments. If migrating
from an earlier package, rename its INI to AC8InputMapper.ini.

Those are the only two new game runtime files. List-Controllers.exe stays
outside the game folder. No renamed Windows dinput8.dll, UE4SS or Lua files
are required. The TM bridge and companion can remain their original shipped
versions; our earlier TM instrumentation proxy is not a runtime dependency.

5. EDIT AC8InputMapper.ini IN A TEXT EDITOR

In [Stick], replace InstanceGUID with your stick's copied instance GUID.
In [Throttle], replace InstanceGUID with your throttle's copied instance GUID.
Each device is identified once; bindings do not repeat GUIDs.

Assign buttons in [Stick.Bindings] or [Throttle.Bindings] by physical number.
Example: Gun=Button2 and MSL=Button12. MSL means Missile.
Assign axes by available token: X, Y, Z, Rx, Ry or Rz.
Examples: Roll=X, Pitch=-Y, Yaw=Z, Throttle=Rx.
A leading minus sign reverses the requested action's axis direction; it already
accounts for the stock profile's conversion. Do not compensate for X56 settings
yourself. Use None to leave an action unassigned.

Use only axes shown in your controller inventory. The example names are not
universal: a different throttle may expose its lever as Z instead of Rx.
One source axis cannot serve two different axis assignments on the same role.
Missing anchor controls block translation for that role. Missing additional
source controls instead neutralize that source; see MULTI-DEVICE.txt. Unknown sections,
keys or malformed values reject the configuration. Do not add arbitrary actions.

The existing two anchor sections retain these role-specific keys (Versions 1 and 2):

Stick buttons:
Gun, MSL, Weapon, Target, View, DPadUp, DPadRight, DPadDown, DPadLeft
Stick axes:
Pitch, Roll, Yaw, CameraPitch, CameraYaw
Throttle buttons:
Radar, Flare, AutoPilot, Pause
Throttle axis:
Throttle

The DPad bindings currently need ButtonN inputs, including hats exposed as
buttons. Native POV tokens and Slider1/Slider2 are not supported by this build.
Actions cannot yet be moved freely between stick/throttle sections. Two distinct
device instance GUIDs are required; a combined single-device HOTAS is not covered.

After replacing both GUID placeholders and setting your bindings, change
Enabled=0 to Enabled=1 under [Compatibility]. Save as AC8InputMapper.ini, not .ini.txt.
Version=1 remains supported for old INIs. Use Version=2 for additional devices
and see MULTI-DEVICE.txt; it keeps the same action/button/axis binding syntax.
Windows Explorer's file-extension display helps avoid mistakes.

6. FIRST LAUNCH AND INPUT CHECK

Connect all configured devices before launching. Disconnect unconfigured
supported HOTAS units for the first test to avoid overlapping native inputs.
Start through Steam with the offline launch setup from step 1. Select expert
flight controls when checking independent pitch, roll and yaw.

At the menu, test Gun/confirm, MSL/back and the mapped hat directions. In flight,
check pitch, roll, yaw and throttle endpoints. In a mission with targets, check
Target, Weapon, Gun and MSL. Also check View and both camera directions.
Pause briefly between tests and quit normally afterward.

The stock X56 profiles have context-dependent aliases: Gun also confirms menus,
MSL also backs out, and DPad directions share hat channels. This build preserves
those aliases; it does not provide 49 independent action assignments.

7. LOGS AND OPTIONAL CAPTURE

Each launch creates ac8-compat-<PID>-<QPC>.log beside dinput8.dll. An inherited
AC8_DI_LOG environment variable overrides the destination.
Check Compatibility version=2 build=0.2.0-experimental enabled=1,
then ready=1 and game_format=1 for
roles 1 (stick) and 2 (throttle). PhysicalState lists one-based source buttons;
State272 shows the translated buffer's zero-based button indices.
Compatibility rejected or ready=0 explains why a device was not translated.
The log may contain input/device identity information; review it before sharing.

For troubleshooting, retain the log and describe the physical input and visible
game response. Logs can contain device identities; review before sharing.
Game updates may require a new release. No live config reload or tested
anchor reconnect support is implemented. Additional-device recovery is
attempted, but real hardware validation is pending. See MULTI-DEVICE.txt.

8. RESTORE NORMAL PROTECTED PLAY

Quit AC8. Remove our dinput8.dll from the game folder, or restore a known-clean
original if the game originally shipped one. Do not restore our old observer
DLL as a way to return to protected play: it is also an in-process proxy.
Remove/disable UE4SS and any other research DLL loaders as appropriate.
If you installed our TM bridge proxy, restore the untouched original bridge
under tm_api_lib_bridge_x64.dll; the renamed original is
tm_api_lib_bridge_original_x64.dll. Leave tm_api_lib_x64.dll original.

Restore your previous Steam launch options or clear our offline command.
The extra offline JSON and INI are not needed for normal launching. Steam's
Verify integrity can restore shipped files, but may leave extra mod DLLs behind;
remove those separately. Only then return to protected/online launching.

These notes document manual setup. No files were deployed, no Steam options
were changed, and no EAC/game settings were modified while writing this guide.
